Hi there.
I'm George Entwistle and I'm the interim superintendent,
and I'm so happy to be here.
This is month six, I think.
Um, and it's just been such a pleasure to work
with this incredible team, uh, that I'm working with.
So welcome here tonight. Thanks for coming.
Um, this I think, is
structured a little bit differently than maybe
what we've done before here.
Um, this is a forum
and there's a difference between a meeting and a forum.
Um, AI told me
That a meeting is a structured, often private gathering
for specific focused purpose, such
as decision making or planning.
I, I buy that. A forum,
however, is generally an open public
or informal gathering focused on exchanging ideas,
and that's what we've invited you here to do tonight.
So welcome to two tonight's session of exchanging ideas
about funding for the South Portland schools.
So, at every good forum, not at every,
because I've attended a lot of meetings
that didn't have very good norms,
but forums generally have some pretty good norms,
and that's some agreements about
how we can interact with each other.
Lemme share these with you.
And by the way, the, the, the board, um, came up
with a whole set of norms that they've created,
and you can find that, um, uh, probably Rosemary.
What would somebody find that,
or it's gonna be in that new, uh, policy, right?
Attached It will be an addendum to a policy
that you'll see soon.
Addendum to the ethics policy.
It's an addendum to the ethics policy.
It's Not up here yet, will be
What? It's
not up there yet,
because it'll be finally adopted by the council. By the
Board. Yes. So
it's coming. Yes.
Um, so I selected these six ground rules.
'cause I think they're, I think they're pretty much the,
the best ones for a situation like this
that is active listening and presence.
So you're listening to understand,
sharing the air, not taking up all of the air at the table,
ensuring everyone has an opportunity to speak,
respectful interaction, treating others with respect,
even those who may hold different views than you.
Speak for yourself. Use I statements.
Share your experiences, perspectives and feelings.
Focus on understanding and not winning. It's not a debate.
Approach the conversation with an open mind
and challenge ideas, not people.
Treat people with dignity. So I think it's
gonna be a great form tonight.
I see lots of smiling faces. That's good.
Um, and let me introduce to you, um, my colleague that, uh,
I work most closely with.
She's absolutely fabulous partner Joe
Johanna, prince.
Dr. Johanna Prince.
Great. Thank you all for being here tonight, uh, to
help us look forward into the future of South Portland
as a community and as a school district.
The way that this evening is going to work is hopefully
for about the next half an hour,
I'm gonna provide some background information
and kind of a high level overview
of the situation that we're facing.
Uh, then we'll take a break.
We'll make sure if there's any clarifying questions about
the information that's been presented, we'll go over that.
And then you will have a chance to engage at your table
in a, in a dialogue about some of the ideas there are.
School district administrators
with those folks raise their hand for me.
Right now. There are school district administrators at every
table who have kind of a structured protocol.
One of them will be leading the conversation
and another will be taking notes to help, uh,
give us insight and feedback.
All of the materials that I'm presenting tonight
are up online.
On your table. There's two QR codes.
The one at the top of the page is going to take you
to our FY 27 budget.
Um, page of the website at the bottom of that sort
of first portion is a link to the session slides.
So again, if you are someone that is worried that you have
to take notes down, it's all available, you can go back
to it and hopefully be able to, um, just engage
with the content this evening.
We'll send probably about half an hour in
our table dialogues.
And as those wrap up, then we do have an exit survey
that we would love some of your feedback around.
What have you heard tonight? What sparked ideas for you?
What do you want to give to guidance,
give guidance on as we move forward?
So that's how the evening works.
A couple of housekeeping items.
We're here in the middle school if you need restrooms out
the door here and to the left,
there's water and snacks here.
Please, please take care of yourself.
If you need to stand up
because that's more comfortable, please do so.
Um, our hope is really that we're, we're here
to engage in a collaborative conversation.
Um, so wanna talk a little bit about the FY
27 budget process.
This is the fiscal year that starts July one of this year
and goes until June 30th, 2027.
The timeline, just so you know,
we have already been hard at work
with this budget development, uh, starting back in October,
even looking at both where will fiscal 26 land
and what's the picture for fiscal 27 in December,
we held association and association meetings,
and also there was a board workshop
to get financial guidance around parameters
that we should work with.
During the month of January.
We've continued with those association meetings,
and then hopefully this evening we will be
able to hear more from you.
Uh, and tomorrow night we'll have a virtual forum as well.
Over the month of February, the superintendent's team,
it's about 25 of us across the district
that hold leadership roles.
We will be working to try
and assemble a, a budget
that the superintendent can then bring forward
to our school board.
At that point, it is considered the superintendent's budget
and, uh, will be presented to the school board in March.
During the month of March, the board will deliberate.
They might ask for additional information, additional,
um, work to be done.
And so it's a dialogue that happens over the course of March
where there are three workshops and a regular meeting.
All of those have public comment
where you are welcome to participate.
And then ultimately our hope is that it, by the end
of March, the board will then vote to adopt the budget
as theirs becomes the school board's budget.
And then they take that onto our partners on city council.
Um, there will be a workshop in April,
and then the city council will vote,
and then ultimately it goes on to the members
of our community for the public vote in June.
So that's a sense of the timeline that we're in, um,
as we work on this budget.
Wanna give a district, uh,
and sort of budget overview, most important, uh,
variable that is impacting us right now
is the change in enrollment that we have faced.
What you're looking at here is the last 10 years
of enrollment and the fact that we were, um,
moving towards a declining enrollment.
Uh, then we had sort of on the backside of the pandemic,
we welcomed a large number of asylum seeking families
that greatly enhanced our community
while those families were living with us, some
of them have stayed.
Um, but then you have also seen that we have now decreased
to the lowest level that we have at.
If any of you, um, happen
to see the article in the Portland Press Herald yesterday,
I think it's a really important one
to realize we are not unique.
This is a statewide issue.
Uh, on the left hand side of this is the statewide numbers
of children in K through 12 education.
So we are facing a similar situation to many,
many districts across the state who are facing
rising costs with declining enrollment.
And that sets up for a really difficult context.
Um, additionally, uh, I thought it was interesting to note
that homeschooling, uh,
we definitely saw a spike in homeschooling
through the pandemic that hasn't really come back down
before pre pandemic levels.
So again, just to put in context,
south Portland is not unique with the moment
that we are facing here.
What is unique for South Portland is the fact
that we have had a change in enrollment
and a change in staffing,
but those two trends are not going the same direction.
What you're looking at here,
the red line is showing you our student enrollment
every two years.
And so you can see we went up our in it peaked, uh, in 2023,
the end of 2022 is where we were seeing that.
Um, and then that enrollment has continued to decline.
What you see in the blue bars
is our staffing numbers.
That is the number of staff that the district hires.
These are staff that are benefits eligible,
meaning our folks like substitutes
or folks who may be just coach for us.
Those are not included in this,
but what you can see is that our staffing levels ha rose
to meet the demand,
but then they've actually continued to rise.
And so that math problem is where we find ourselves,
um, with the challenge.
We do know that part of the reason that that has happened is
that the needs of our students continue
to be increasingly complex.
We are really fortunate in the amazing
programs we offer here.
Um, but those can be more resource intensive in terms
of how we staff them.
So a lot of numbers here.
So I'm gonna walk you through this.
The left hand column is FY 26.
The current fiscal year that we are in with our current
operating budget, that represented an increase in
total spending of 5.84%.
Our revenue offsets some of that cost,
and then the rest is either state funded
or is raised through local tax dollars.
So for homeowners that are paying
that tax increase, it's a 6.1%
for the school portion of their taxes for this year.
If we were to take forward all of our current staff
and programs inflate for raises,
lane changes, all of those contractual benefits that come,
and we assumed a 12% health increase in terms of
what Anthem will charge overall for its, uh, benefits,
our taxpayers would be looking at an 18.95%
tax increase for just the school portion of their tax bill.
When we met with the board in December,
the board gave us some guidance around
what feels like a reasonable, uh, financial goal
for us to work towards.
At that point, the board, uh,
used a couple different numbers for our assumptions.
We've moved forward that the ceiling is 6%.
So the the number in the bottom right hand corner has
to be 6% or lower.
That certainly is a number
that can change both the school board,
the city council voters can indicate that that's too high,
that's too low through the, the actions
that will take on over the next couple months in order
to reach that financial goal.
It means we have a gap of $7.2 million that we are
over if we take forward all of our current services
and programs and staff.
So that's the math problem that we are trying to think about
as we face those rise in costs and declining enrollment.
In December, we shared with the board that we,
and by we, I mean that leadership team
that's working on this, we believe this is going to take
big ideas for us to think about a path forward.
When we met in December, we presented these four ideas
as places for us to begin conversation.
They are not yet proposals, they are not yet,
um, ready for action,
but simply represent the kind of big ideas
that we might need to engage in.
Since that meeting, the administrative team has started
to work on what's feasible here.
What, what would this really look like?
And so now what you are looking at
and what I'm gonna talk about tonight is this has really
changed into three potential big ideas.
And I'm actually gonna say four
and you'll understand why I say four in a minute.
So the first big idea
is considering a reconfiguration of
how our elementary schools are broken up.
Currently. They're broken up by geography.
Another way that districts do take on, um,
early education is through different grade bands.
The second idea is to review schedules
and responsibilities of staff at SPMS
and the high school for efficiencies and changes.
Mostly looking at class sizes, teaching loads, um,
course offerings, those sort of, um, situations.
The third one that is up here is exploring shift changes
or other creative ideas to,
to really think about those operational efficiencies.
Are there new ways we could do some of our work?
And I'll talk about that fourth idea
in the middle in a minute.
What is important to note is I'm gonna
talk through these ideas.
The three ideas that I just talked about are in blue, red,
and yellow as estimated potential savings.
So our job as a community tonight is, is not one
of making a choice.
It's considering that even if we did all three of those
still have the green piece of the pie that we have to solve
for, there's over $3 million that
that may not account for.
And so again, it is a sobering reality of the way
that we are gonna have to think about the problem
as we seek to solve it.
So again, there are not proposals yet,
but we did want to be able to give you,
as the community members some initial estimates of
what we think may be possible with consideration.
Some of these proposals such
as this one would need board action
to rezone our elementary schools.
We, we wanna be respectful of that process,
but we also wanna present a reality of, you know,
this could be a place for us to look.
We believe that this reconfiguration
because it would consolidate grade levels into the same
building, it allows us to have larger class sizes.
Um, and we do anticipate that this is 2 million
or upwards as a potential savings idea.
Two, um, again, sort of focusing in on grades five
through 12 and looking at, uh, schedules
and staffing of those buildings.
We believe this would be an estimate of a million dollars.
And then likewise, within service
and our operational budget, we,
we believe there may be another million there.
So again, the same graphic here.
Um, that 2.25 is not a correct number,
so I'll change that in a minute.
Mm-hmm. But it represents the green pie.
Um, we know that that means we have to be looking under
every single line in our budget,
looking at our contracts with outside providers.
Could we do without something,
could we find a less expensive vendor?
Looking at our central office leadership team will be
important, looking at our supply items,
any unfilled positions, any redundancy of work efforts
that we may have that we may be able to think about.
And then we certainly can also look on the revenue side
of are there additional grants
or other ways that the district could be bringing in money?
Because again, that lowers the tax burden,
uh, as we do that.
So in a minute, we're going
to move into the discussion phase of our evening.
Before we do that, though,
I think it's useful if there are questions about the
information that would be helpful to the group.
I, I'd like to take a few minutes to just answer those so
that folks feel like they understand sort
of the landscape that we're working on.
Does anyone have questions?
Can you tell us a little bit about
what makes up the revenue line?
Sure. And I had heard talk
of South Portland creating a foundation, so for funding,
outside funding grants and that kind of thing.
And is there an update on that?
Sure. It's a great question.
So, uh, the revenue line is the middle line of this.
So the revenue comes from a variety of sources.
The largest volume of our revenue comes from the,
our state aid, which is part
of the essential programs and services model.
Each district in Maine has, there's a standard formula
that's used across Maine for South Portland.
Next year it's about 15.4 million.
We are on the lower end as a receiver in terms
of a community across Maine.
And that is because we have a higher valuation
of a tax base here.
Those sort of equal each other.
So in addition, there, we have revenue that comes in from
a transportation agreement that we have with Portland,
where we do some of the service on their
buses for some billing.
We can do through MaineCare, through revenue,
we collect at gate set athletic facilities.
Those are much smaller dollar figures.
Um, but those make up that 16 million.
You'll notice that our revenue is projected
to be lower next year.
One of the issues that we face is that in prior years,
we have used our, what's called your fund balance.
Your fund balance acts like your savings account.
And our savings account has now been used,
so we no longer have that cushion to try and offset
and lower the tax burden.
Again, those have been important choices over the last few
years to use those dollars.
Um, so that's what makes up the revenue.
With regards to the conversation about an education
foundation, there is an education foundation in the works.
It's incredibly exciting.
Philanthropy will not solve the problem that we have here.
And the vision of the Education Foundation is not
to close this operating budget
and to sort of explain this challenge, the vision of
that education foundation will be to supplement and support.
And again, it is very unlikely in a foundation's
starting years that they have substantial budgets.
So, great questions.
Any other questions? Yes. I have
A question about the class size. You
said that if they consolidate the elementary schools
Potential for larger class sizes,
what's the average elementary school
or primary age class size right now?
Sure. I'm working on that data
because it's been, uh, requested.
Um, at the elementary school we have classes as low
as 10 students and as high as 20.
Bethany, what's your highest right?
My highest is 19.
Yeah, I think, uh, I think 24 at small.
So 10 to 24.
I would say our average for elementary schools
is probably 16.
Um, but working on that data,
because it's important, the board does have, uh,
class size guidelines that we work under in terms of
what the, uh, the ceiling is for grades K through two
and then three through four and,
and on up. Yeah.
Do you have an idea of what that class
Size would look like with the reconfiguration?
Sure. It would definitely move the class sizes
higher within a range.
Um, we are looking at, uh, you know, 18 to 19 students
for the K to two band,
and then looking at 22 to 23 for the grades two
through four band is what we would model
with. Yes. Um,
Just in response to the pre configuring, um, how does the
busing, the money saved from increased class size, how does
that, what are some general numbers of like,
what the busing cost would be in response to that?
That's how, that's my first thought is that
Sure. And again,
because these are all preliminary ideas, we,
we don't have all of those, these are all great questions
that we know if, um, if we move forward with this,
we're going to need to model for.
Um, the reality is,
is we currently run five school schedules every single day,
and we bus kids back
and forth across the town in so many complex ways.
Um, you know, that we would need to kind
of look at the whole picture, not just that single change,
um, but realize that it would be part of the,
the math we would need to do.
So when you say five, you mean pre-K elementary, fifth
and sixth, seventh and eighth and the high
School? Correct. Okay.
Yep.
So we already have, um, sort
of crisscrossing happening every day.
And so again, are there efficiencies?
Maybe we, we would wanna look at the whole picture.
All right. So, oh, I'm sorry. There's a hand. Yes.
Hi. Um, Joey just wanted to clarify something
and then I had a question.
Uh, the clarification was, uh,
on the class size question.
Am I correct that the goal would be
to stay still within the guidelines that the board has,
but it would just shift
because we have some very small class sizes?
Some. Okay.
And, um, on the health insurance projection,
the last conversation we had, it was 8%
and you're now at 12%.
So can you just say a little bit about that
and how you've increased 4%?
I, I mean, we don't have this information,
we won't have it until the end of March.
So just how you're estimating this, um, increase.
Sure. It's a great question.
Um, it is a really challenging number
to to estimate.
Um, like Rosemary said,
we get this information from MEA benefits trust typically
around March 25th as the board is finalizing their,
you know, uh, kind of their adoption of the budget.
Um, the reason that we have made the choice
to move up is our finance director,
Abigail Tchen, you wanna wave.
Abigail, uh, has been checking in with her colleagues, uh,
across the state and in our surrounding areas
and similar districts, folks are budgeting between 10
to 15% increase.
Um, so again, it felt wise that we are having some signals
that there could be increased costs, um,
and felt that that was a wise decision last year.
If you were involved in the process, you may recall
that we had been budgeting for a 5% increase
and the last week
of March found out it was 7.5% increase.
Uh, that is a more challenging place to find
yourself than hearing good news at the end of March.
Again, we wanna balance that with a reasonable estimate
as we have to make difficult decisions.
But that, uh, felt like a, an important shift
On your first brainstorming,
I saw something about the two middle school times
consolidating to one,
and then I didn't see it on the one through three.
Was that shifted over and that's still on the table,
or is that something that was set aside?
Thank you for asking that. I should have talked about why
that, uh, disappeared there.
We still believe that there would be, uh,
positive outcomes in making that shift.
What we've realized in the last month as we have dug into
that is that that timeline is much of it is out
of our control because it requires permitting
and traffic studies
and the Department of Transportation taking action that
isn't a matter of just working harder
in the next six months.
It's just not possible in that timeline.
So those conversations are still continuing so
that we could be thinking about that potentially for
fall of 27.
But it just, it became increasingly clear that a September
of 26 deadline for that was not realistic.
So we took it off the list for right now. Yes.
Speaking of other districts
or other district about money situation,
has any other district dealt with this kind of
large amount they needed to cut out of their budget?
And if, if so, how did they do it? What did they do?
Uh, yes.
It is a, a fairly unfortunately common situation.
Um, reconfiguration is definitely, probably the primary way
that folks tackle it, uh, if they are in a multiple
building structure like we are.
Um, and then closing an entire school is the other option
that has significant cost savings.
Um, that is, is not on the list that you're looking at here.
And part of the reason that it is not on the list you're
looking at here is that, uh,
main le main legislature has changed the way that we support
and program children who are three through age three
through age five, with special education needs.
The school district has to take on responsibility
for those students by the end of two years time.
It does not mean they are that suddenly we're going
to have three year olds in our classrooms,
but it does mean that we will have
to provide for their services.
And we know that we need to move towards universal pre-K.
So we're hesitant to think about a closure
of a building when we know we're gonna have some
increase in the number of students.
So, but certainly it, it is another way
that people tackle this issue.
What I would like to do right now is I'm gonna invite the
administrators in the room to just stand up
and introduce themselves and, uh, tell you what building
or what role they fill, just so
that you can get to know who's in the room.
And then I'll talk about transitioning
into our conversations.
So maybe Bethany, we'll start with you. She
Say to Stand up. Yes.
You do have to stand up. Bethany, yes.
Get to be first. Hi, I'm Bethany.
I'm the principal at Skill Elementary School.
Hi, you, assistant director for special education.
And then once you get the high school end up,
We'll Go to the back table. Abigail,
You next? Hi
everyone. I'm Abigail Kitchen Director
of Finance and HR Operations.
You've already met me. So I'm George.
George, I'm, uh, Myra, Karen,
I'm the principal at LERs School.
Hi, I'm Todd Libson,
I'm the athletic director for district.
I'm Matt, assistant principal, fifth,
sixth grade, uh, the middle school.
Hi, Jeff Kellogg
at Hi, Ellen Feric.
I'm the Director of curriculum instruction
and assessment for the district.
Oh, I'm sorry, go ahead. I know, I'm just kidding.
I'm Heather ERs, I'm assistant principal at the high school.
Go ahead,
Mike. Natalie, director of
Operations and Safety.
Ben Donald, another assistant principal at the high school.
Hi Mayor, everybody. I'm sorry, I'm not standing injury,
but I have Cat Cox
and I'm the director of, uh, special education in district.
Great. We're
Gonna do one more round of introductions.
They don't know they're about to introduce themselves.
I'm gonna have our school board members
who are in the house, uh, introduce themselves.
Uh, so who would like to start off?
Rosemary, you wanna start us off?
Rosemary, Go ahead Alex. Okay.
Um, my name's Alex Davison and I'm a student rep.
Hi, my name is Angela, also student,
Uh, Daniel Fowler, district one.
Hi, Eleni Richardson at large.
I'm, uh, Tyler Smith, district two,
Claire Holman at large.
George Rich, uh, district four. Great. All right.
We're gonna transition into the part
of our evening where you will be
Having table conversations.
Um, if you came in a little late, um,
please find your way to a table.
Those of you who are at tables, if you want to move
to a different table right now, that is okay.
If you need a snack, get up and get a snack, uh,
and shift into that portion.
I have the realization. I also, as I am reading
The documents, uh,
and getting to listen to the conversations
that are happening, I can't thank you enough.
Um, the, the ideas that people are sharing, the thoughts,
um, and the kinds of conversations
that we are having are the ones that we will need
to have over the coming months.
So thank you for being here tonight.
I I do wanna respect that you all have busy lives
and, uh, families to get home to potentially.
So I just wanna talk briefly about next steps
and then I'll give you a chance to wrap up any last thoughts
that you wanna make sure that we capture
as we bring the evening to a close.
The, the process, as I said, uh, is one
where we need engagement.
We want engagement and your input.
Uh, these are dates that are posted on our website.
There is a regular board meeting next Monday.
That board meeting, given the timing of it,
will not have extensive content on the budget,
but we do anticipate sharing out themes that we hear tonight
and in our forum tomorrow night.
And then in March we have this series of board workshops.
We also know that as the wheels start turning,
people start wanting to ask questions so
that they can better understand the issue this year.
To facilitate that process, we've tried to streamline it.
And this link will take you sort of
to the bottom of our FY 27 budget page
where there is a Google form where you can submit,
you can submit three questions per form.
You can submit multiple forms if you would like,
but we are asking folks
to include their email address and their name.
What we will be doing with those questions is
as they come in, we will begin.
And you can see the example here
as we are getting questions in the
question will be up at the top.
We'll provide as much data as we can, um,
and sort of when it got asked as,
and so, you know, how many teachers will be eligible
for retirement stipend, those sort of questions
that may inform our conversations.
What we will also do is we will put at the back
of this slide deck the questions that are awaiting replies.
It's important to note that some
of these inquiries can take four
or five, six hours to assemble.
We have to be thoughtful about the fact
that our first priority is running a
school district day to day.
We want to provide as much information as possible,
but you might be able to see
that a question's already been submitted so
that you can await for it, await the answer,
but trying to get this information out instead
of just one person emailing me
that we can share this information widely.
So again, do encourage you to use this
so we can see the kind of questions that are coming in.
Um, and we will, we will work as diligently as we can to,
to make the answers available.
The final thing for this evening is on your table
there is at the bottom of the page, there is a QR code
for an anonymous exit ticket.
It's both to give us feedback on the format of the evening
and also the ideas and the conversation.
We will leave this open until first thing Friday morning,
probably about, uh, 8:00 AM So anytime
before then you're welcome to complete that form.
We'll close it so that we can make sense of it
with our notes from the forum
and share those out with the community in a written
format on Friday.
And then again, hopefully at the board meeting on Monday,
there also is an option for people
who are not here in person who might have gone
through the slides that would like to still be able
to give feedback on feedback on what they see.
So again, you can share that with your colleagues
that the slides are available.
They can still provide that feedback on the ideas.
Joe, yes, if I can just say, you bet one. Thank you.
Um, this came up at our table
that it probably came up at other tables.
We are in the middle of a new, of a search
for a new superintendent.
This is not because we're trying to get rid of George,
but he is going to go, um, I don't know where,
but he's gonna go and I'm gonna retire.
So for the third, um, there, there was a virtual day, uh,
February 3rd where the Team Zeal education group
that is assisting us in the search, uh, conducted, um,
multiple sessions on virtually.
There were three people who attended those three,
like 1, 2, 3.
So, uh, we're trying to get input the ninth and the 10th.
They're, the schedule is on the, um, district website.
And so you can see when the team is going
to be at different schools where they're gonna be meeting
with teachers, with staff, with ed techs,
with um, transportation.
It's all there. But we really want your input,
and we talked at this group about who's at the table
and basically who's at the table are teachers,
administrators, ed, Edtechs, uh, parents.
There are not people who are representative
of the majority of our community,
and those are the rest of our taxpayers.
So the, the, that's other than me.
And there's probably some other people in the room, um,
but not very many.
So that's who we need to embrace
and we need to get input from people.
So, so that we don't hear
after we do this hiring that people weren't included.
You know, because we're giving, we're making our best effort
to, um, involve people
and to get your thoughts and your input.
So, uh, this is my pitch
for teaching civics again, the high school.
But anyway, thank you.
Thank you all for coming again.
Feel free to finish up your conversation.
Uh, administrators will will be here
for about the next 10 minutes
to capture any additional thoughts,
answer any questions you may have.
And again, thank you for being here tonight
and sharing your ideas.
I am really excited to continue to look through them.
And with that, feel free to head out if that is
where your evening needs to take you.
Uh, we appreciate you being here this evening.